ADR 17: Historical header module (#5340)
cosmos/cosmos-sdk: docs/architecture/adr-017-historical-header-module.md

# ADR 17: Historical Header Module

## Changelog

- 26 November 2019: Start of first version
- 2 December 2019: Final draft of first version

## Context

In order for the Cosmos SDK to implement the [IBC specification](https://github.com/cosmos/ics), modules within the SDK must have the ability to introspect recent consensus states (validator sets & commitment roots) as proofs of these values on other chains must be checked during the handshakes.

## Decision

> The application MUST instruct Tendermint to provide requisite information for the application to track the past `n` headers by indicating as such in a field on `abci.ResponseInitChain` containing the value of `n`.

Reviewer: I assume this is a concrete  baseapp option passed on the app initialization (i.e `func(*bam.BaseApp)`) ?

Author: I suppose it could be an option on `BaseApp`.

It (the value `n`) could also be read from state, although it can't change once the chain has started.

- The value of this field MAY default to `0` for ease of backwards compatibility with other ABCI clients which do not require this header-introspection functionality.

Tendermint MUST read this field when handling the `abci.ResponseInitChain` response, and then behave as follows:
- With the first `abci.RequestBeginBlock`, Tendermint MUST send the `n` most recent committed headers in order.
  - If fewer than `n` previous headers exist, Tendermint MUST send all previous headers.

> - With subsequent `abci.RequestBeginBlock` calls, Tendermint MUST send the the most recent committed header.

Author: Only the latest, since the application already has the previously sent headers in memory.

The application MUST use this header data provided by `abci.RequestBeginBlock` to track the past `n` committed headers in the `BaseApp`:

> - When handling the first `abci.RequestBeginBlock` invocation, the application must store all `n` committed headers in memory.

Author: In memory (as a field on the baseapp, which is copied into the context, I suppose).

- When handling subsequent `abci.RequestBeginBlock` invocations, the application must remove the oldest commmited header from memory and store the most recent one (provided as a field of `abci.RequestBeginBlock`).

The application MUST make these past `n` committed headers available for querying by SDK modules through the `sdk.Context` as follows:

```golang
func (c Context) PreviousHeader(height uint64) tmtypes.Header {

>   // implemented in the context

Reviewer: can you complete this function? What if the `height` provided is not in store?

# ADR 17: Historical Header Module

## Changelog

- 26 November 2019: Start of first version
- 2 December 2019: Final draft of first version

## Context

In order for the Cosmos SDK to implement the [IBC specification](https://github.com/cosmos/ics), modules within the SDK must have the ability to introspect recent consensus states (validator sets & commitment roots) as proofs of these values on other chains must be checked during the handshakes.

## Decision

The application MUST store the most recent `n` headers in a persistent store. At first, this store MAY be the current Merklised store. A non-Merklised store MAY be used later as no proofs are necessary.

The application MUST store this information by storing new headers immediately when handling `abci.RequestBeginBlock`:

```golang

> func BeginBlock(ctx sdk.Context, keeper HistoricalHeaderKeeper, req abci.RequestBeginBlock) abci.ResponseBeginBlock {

Reviewer: is this part of a new module?

Author: It can be. If we do anything similar in another module perhaps we could combine them.

Author: Added a comment about this.

  info := HistoricalInfo{
    Header: ctx.BlockHeader(),

>     ValSet: keeper.StakingKeeper.GetAllValidators(ctx),

Reviewer: do we need the validator set to be sorted (eg by power)?

Author: I believe it would be sorted already? It just needs to be canonically ordered.

Author: Added a comment.

  }
  keeper.SetHistoricalInfo(ctx, ctx.BlockHeight(), info)
  n := keeper.GetParamRecentHeadersToStore()
  keeper.PruneHistoricalInfo(ctx, ctx.BlockHeight() - n)
  // continue handling request
}
```

The application MUST make these past `n` committed headers available for querying by SDK modules through the `Keeper`'s `GetHistoricalInfo` function.

`n` MAY be configured as a parameter store parameter, in which case it could be changed by `ParameterChangeProposal`s, although it will take some blocks for the stored information to catch up if `n` is increased.

## Status

Proposed.

## Consequences

Implementation of this ADR will require changes to the Cosmos SDK. It will not require changes to Tendermint.

### Positive

- Easy retrieval of headers & state roots for recent past heights by modules anywhere in the SDK
- No RPC calls to Tendermint required
- No ABCI alterations required

### Negative

> - Duplicates header data in Tendermint & the application (additional disk usage)

Reviewer: do you see any alternative (medium/long term) to fix this issue?

Author: Yes. https://github.com/tendermint/tendermint/issues/4210

Author: Added a comment linking to this.

> - Duplicates header data in Tendermint & the application (additional disk usage)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Duplicates `n` headers data in Tendermint & the application (additional disk usage)
```

## Decision

The application MUST store the most recent `n` headers in a persistent store. At first, this store MAY be the current Merklised store. A non-Merklised store MAY be used later as no proofs are necessary.

The application MUST store this information by storing new headers immediately when handling `abci.RequestBeginBlock`:

```golang
func BeginBlock(ctx sdk.Context, keeper HistoricalHeaderKeeper, req abci.RequestBeginBlock) abci.ResponseBeginBlock {
  info := HistoricalInfo{
    Header: ctx.BlockHeader(),
    ValSet: keeper.StakingKeeper.GetAllValidators(ctx), // note that this must be stored in a canonical order
  }
  keeper.SetHistoricalInfo(ctx, ctx.BlockHeight(), info)
  n := keeper.GetParamRecentHeadersToStore()
  keeper.PruneHistoricalInfo(ctx, ctx.BlockHeight() - n)
  // continue handling request
}
```

Alternatively, the application MAY store only the hash of the validator set.

> The application MUST make these past `n` committed headers available for querying by SDK modules through the `Keeper`'s `GetHistoricalInfo` function. This MAY be implemented in a new module, or it MAY also be integrated into an existing one (likely `x/staking`).

Reviewer: what about storing it on the canonical IBC Keeper? I don't see the need for blockchains that are not using IBC to store the extra headers.

Author: Sure, added `x/ibc` as another suggestion.
